P8105 - Homework 2
================
Joe LaRocca
2024-09-24

## Problem 1

``` r
subway_df <- read_csv("data/NYC_Transit_Subway_Entrance_And_Exit_Data.csv") %>%
  janitor::clean_names()  %>%
  select(division:entry, vending, ada) %>%
  mutate(
    entry = case_match(
      entry,
      "YES" ~ TRUE,
      "NO" ~ FALSE
    )
  )
```

    ## Rows: 1868 Columns: 32
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (22): Division, Line, Station Name, Route1, Route2, Route3, Route4, Rout...
    ## dbl  (8): Station Latitude, Station Longitude, Route8, Route9, Route10, Rout...
    ## lgl  (2): ADA, Free Crossover
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

##### Part 1: Variables, Data Cleaning, and Rows/Columns

The data contains the name of the subway division, the subway line (the
major road the station is located at), the station name, the station’s
latitude and longitude in degrees (positive means north/east, negative
means south/west), each of the routes the station serves (up to 11;
larger stations, like those at 34 St/Penn Station and 42 St, have larger
numbers of routes served), the type of entrance
(stair/door/elevator/escalator/easement), whether the station has a
vending machine, and whether the station is ADA compliant.

So far, I’ve used the `janitor` package to convert each of the column
names to all-lowercase, selected the 20 columns that the problem asked
for using the `select()` function, and converted the `entry` column into
a logical variable using `case_match()` within the `mutate()` function.

The cleaned-up dataset has a total of 1868 rows and 20 columns.

##### Part 2: Answering Questions About the Dataset

``` r
subway_df %>%
  distinct(line, station_name) %>%
  nrow()
```

    ## [1] 465

Using the `distinct()` function, I found that there are 465 unique
station names. I used `distinct()` to create a new $n \times 1$ data
frame, where $n$ is the number of distinct subway stations. Then, I
simply took the number of rows of the data frame to find the number of
distinct stations.

``` r
subway_df %>%
  select(ada) %>%
  sum()
```

    ## [1] 468

Using the `select` and `sum` functions, I found that there are 468
ADA-compliant stations. Taking advantage of the fact that R counts
`TRUE` values as 1 and `FALSE` values as 0 within a logical variable, I
simply took the sum of the `ada` column to find the number of stations
that are ADA compliant.

``` r
subway_df %>%
  filter(vending == "NO") %>%
  pull(entry) %>%
  mean()
```

    ## [1] 0.3770492

I found that the proportion of station entrances/exits without vending
that allow entrance is about 0.377, or 37.7%. To do so, I used
`filter()` to select only the rows without vending, used `pull()` to get
the `entry` column as a logical vector, and then took the mean of the
`entry` vector to get the proportion of `TRUE` values.

##### Part 3: The A Train

``` r
subway_tidy_df =
  subway_df %>%
  mutate(route8 = as.character(route8),
         route9 = as.character(route9),
         route10 = as.character(route10),
         route11 = as.character(route11)
         ) %>%
  pivot_longer(
    route1:route11,
    names_to = "route_number",
    values_to = "route",
    names_prefix = "route"
  ) %>%
  filter(!is.na(route))
```

First, I noticed that since some subway routes in New York are
represented by numbers (for example, the 1 train), I converted the
`route8` through `route11` columns to character in order to maintain
consistency (in addition, the `pivot_longer()` function doesn’t work if
all of the columns selected aren’t of the same variable type). Then, I
used `pivot_longer()` to separate `route_number`, which gives the index
of the route, and `route`, which specifies the precise route of the
train. Finally, I used `filter` to select only the rows for which an
actual route exists.

``` r
subway_tidy_df %>%
  distinct(line, station_name, route) %>%
  filter(route == "A") %>%
  nrow()
```

    ## [1] 60

I found that there are 60 distinct stations that serve the A train.
First, I used `distinct()` to select all unique combinations of line,
station name, and route. Then, I filtered the data frame to include only
stations which served the A train, and then took the number of rows of
the data frame.

``` r
subway_tidy_df %>%
  distinct(line, station_name, route, ada) %>%
  filter(route == "A" & ada == TRUE) %>%
  nrow()
```

    ## [1] 17

Of the 60 distinct stations that serve the A train, 17 of them are ADA
compliant. I used a similar process to the one I used in the previous
question, except this time, I included `ada` in the `distinct` function
and filtered the data frame by both `route` and `ada`.

## Problem 2

##### Upload and Clean Data

``` r
mr_trash_wheel_df = 
  read_excel("data/202309 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
             sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel",
             skip = 1) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  filter(!is.na(dumpster)) %>%
  select(dumpster:homes_powered) %>%
  mutate(
    sports_balls = as.integer(sports_balls)
    ) %>%
  add_column(wheel = "Mr. Trash Wheel",
             .before = "dumpster") 
```

    ## New names:
    ## • `` -> `...15`
    ## • `` -> `...16`

``` r
prof_trash_wheel_df = 
  read_excel("data/202309 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
             sheet = "Professor Trash Wheel",
             skip = 1) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  filter(!is.na(dumpster)) %>%
  add_column(sports_balls = NA, 
             .before = "homes_powered") %>%
  add_column(wheel = "Professor Trash Wheel",
             .before = "dumpster") %>%
  mutate(
    year = as.character(year)
  )

gwynnda_trash_wheel_df = 
  read_excel("data/202309 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
             sheet = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel",
             skip = 1) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  filter(!is.na(dumpster)) %>%
  add_column(sports_balls = NA, 
             .before = "homes_powered") %>%
  add_column(wheel = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel",
             .before = "dumpster") %>%
  mutate(
    year = as.character(year)
  )


total_trash_wheel_df = bind_rows(mr_trash_wheel_df, 
                                 prof_trash_wheel_df,
                                 gwynnda_trash_wheel_df)
```

To clean the data, I used `janitor::clean_names()` to convert all
variable names to lowercase, used `filter()` to omit the last row of
both data frames, which tracks the totals and does not represent
single-dumpster data, added the `wheel` variable to distinguish between
Mr. Trash Wheel and Professor Trash Wheel, added a `sports_balls` column
to the Professor Trash Wheel and Gwynnda Trash Wheel data frames and
converted the `year` column to a character variable to make the two data
frames compatible for binding, and then binded the two data frames
together using `bind_rows()`.

The Mr. Trash Wheel data frame has 584 rows, the Professor Trash Wheel
data frame has 106 rows, and the Gwynnda Trash Wheel has 155 for a total
of 845 unique dumpsters.

``` r
nrow(mr_trash_wheel_df)
```

    ## [1] 584
